
Possibilities for a specific number of nodes in directed and
undirected networks

How many possibilities for graphlets of size 5 nodes

What is the sequence for the number of types of motifs in
directed networks for various sizes?

What is the sequene of motifs for mixed networks 
networks that have both directed and undirected links?

Ordered cyclic motifs contribute to dynamic stability in
biological and engineered networks

Biological networks
 - lot more sources and sinks compared to pass through nodes

Cell signaling networks are more stable, many sources and
sinks found in cycles

Magnetization Model

Microdynamics and Criticality of Adaptive Regulatory Networks
We present a model of adaptive regulatory networks consisting
of a simple biologically motivated rewiring procedure coupled
to an elementary stability criterion. The resulting networks
exhibit a characteristic stationery heavy tailed degree distribution
show complex structural microdynamics and self organize to
a dynamically critical state. We show analytically that the
observed criticality results from the formation of transient
feedback loops during the adaptive process.

Prior models mostly generate undirected networks

None of the prior models were able to create a system that
display the rise and fall of hubs and match the distribution
of network motifs.

1. Start with a random directed network.
2. Pick randomly an arrow
3. Compute the magnetization of the arrow
4. Place the arrow somewhere else on the network, make it
connect two other nodes.
5. Compute the magnetization for the arrow at it's new location.
We want to see if the new location contributes to an increase
in the sources and sinks. If yes, we accept teh swap.
6. Decide if to accept the swap: if there is more magnetization
at the new location and the network is unstable accept the swap.
Also, if the network is stable (this can be determined by computing
the adjacency matrix eigenvalues) accept the link regardless if it
is contributing or not to the global magnetization. Otherwise,
reject the swap and try a different arrow.

If we repeat the above process, we eventually get a scale free
network.

Hierarchical Organization of Pathways from LIgands

Power-law distribution of branched pathways




