
Modeling

A theory that is consistent with the data
Coarse-grained abstraction of the system
Need to be cognitively and mathematically understood
Represent the structure and/or dynamics of the real system
Need to be predictive
Models are all wrong but some are useful


Konigsberg Bridge Problem
1736 - Euler
Network modeling of complex systems
Graph Theory - seven bridges
Erdos-Renyi Random Networks
What are the mathematical consequences of throwing on the floor a
random number of buttons and randomly connecting them with a random number
of links?

The connecting frequency distribution follows Poisson.
Plot number of connection per node, and frequency of nodes.

Real Networks are Small World
Film actors, Powergrid, C. elegans

Real world networks are not random
High clustering coefficient, relative short characteristic pathway
Level of clustering - avg. distance between pairs of nodes

Lactual v/s Lrandom. Lrandom is expected for random networks

L >= Lrandom and C >= Crandom

How to computer Clustering Coefficient

C=1 all of the neighbors are connected to each other
C=1/2 only 3 out of possible are implemented
C=0 when there are no connections between neighbors.

characteric path length
Avg. shortest path between all possible pairs of nodes

There are shortest path segments found in highly clustered networks.
In real world networks.

Barabasi and Albert
Powerlog distributed network instaed of poisson

Rich get richer
High fitness agents increase their connections and fitness faster
than the less connected.

Node ID    Connection      p
1		2	0.17
2		3	0.25
3		4	0.33
4		2	0.17
5		2	0.08
sum		12

The node 3 is connected with higher probability to other nodes.

The importance of hubs
Most of the nodes in the network have very few connections
Then there are those highly connected nodes
Lethality and centrality in protein networks
if you destory those hubs, the network will fall apart faster
When you knock down the genes that are highly connected,
the viability of the organism is going to be much lower

Complex systems are made up of diverse agents
when you compare a lot of things that are different, we get 
the log k v/s log P(k)

sometimes there is a drop in the size of hubs - two reasons
- sometype of limit of how tall a building can be
- hubs nodes age, and lose capacity to accept links
- maximal physical capacity for hub to grow

